variant wheels: start updating the basics (#32)
wheelnext/wheelnext: docs/proposals/pepxxx_wheel_variant_support.md

specifications.

Multiple values are permitted as a logical disjunction, while different features are treated conjunctively. This is
meant to provide some flexibility in designating variant compatibility while avoiding having to implement a complete
boolean logic. This flexibility is further extended via the concept of dynamic plugins, permitting the values to
be dynamically interpreted, e.g. as version ranges.

#### Variant hash

Variant hash is used as a stable and unique identifier for every set of variant properties. It is truncated to
8 characters in order to ensure that filenames remain short. SHA256 algorithm was chosen, because it is already widely
used in wheels, in the `RECORD` file and therefore the package managers do not have to implement an additional
algorithm.

To ensure reproducible hash values, properties are sorted before hashing. They are then serialized into a canonical
string form, and each one is terminated with a newline character to ensure their separation.

As a special case, a variant hash of `00000000` is used for the null variant, in order to make it easily distinguishable
from other variants.

> #### Null variant

Reviewer: This section should probably say that publishing a null variant is optional, and that if it's missing then the non-variant-enabled wheel acts as the null variant.

   by `get_supported_configs()`, and afterwards reordered according to the overrides in `default-priorities.feature`
   key.

3. All property values for features are initially ordered according to the order in which they are returned
   by `get_supported_configs()`, and afterwards reordered according to the overrides in `default-priorities.property`
   key.

4. Properties are sorted top-down according to namespace-feature-value ordering. Properties from a higher priority
   namespace sort above these from a lower priority namespace. Within a single namespace, properties from a higher
   priority feature sort above these from a lower priority feature. Within a single feature, properties from a higher
   priority value sort above these from a lower priority value.

5. Wheel variants are sorted according to their property priorities. A variant with a higher priority property sorts
   above a variant without that property. Therefore, a variant with all possible properties would sort first, a variant
   with all properties but the lowest priority one second, and so on. The null variant always sorts last, but it takes
   precedence over a non-variant wheel.

> ### Integration with build systems

Reviewer: It'd be more correct to use "build backends" here and in the text below.

may introduce variant wheels, therefore causing the package manager to install arbitrary packages for the provider
plugin, and execute code from them. This effectively goes against [the rationale for the wheel
format](https://peps.python.org/pep-0427/#rationale), that aimed to avoid running arbitrary code at install time.
Furthermore, it has been pointed out that packages that will be used as a regular user are installed with elevated
privileges, effectively making arbitrary code execution even more serious of a threat.

The proposal opens at least two new points in the installation supply chain for malicious actors to inject arbitrary
code payload:

1. A new version of an existing provider plugin is published with malicious code.

2. A new variant is added to an existing package, with a malicious provider.

Unfortunately, it is impossible to fully address these concerns without sacrificing the flexibility and user
convenience. Nevertheless, it should be possible to reduce the risks. In particular, the following options have been
suggested:

- Providing users with more explicit control over variant usage. The package manager should provide options to disable

>   variant use entirely, allow users to specify allow-lists and block-lists for variant providers, pin them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  variant use entirely, allow users to specify allow-lists and block-lists for variant providers, and pin them.
```

be dynamically interpreted, e.g. as version ranges.

#### Variant hash

Variant hash is used as a stable and unique identifier for every set of variant properties. It is truncated to
8 characters in order to ensure that filenames remain short. SHA256 algorithm was chosen, because it is already widely
used in wheels, in the `RECORD` file and therefore the package managers do not have to implement an additional
algorithm.

To ensure reproducible hash values, properties are sorted before hashing. They are then serialized into a canonical
string form, and each one is terminated with a newline character to ensure their separation.

As a special case, a variant hash of `00000000` is used for the null variant, in order to make it easily distinguishable
from other variants.

#### Null variant

The concept of a null variant was added to make it possible to distinguish a fallback wheel variant from a regular wheel
published for backwards compatibility. For example, a package that features optional GPU support could publish
the following wheels:

1. One or more GPU wheel variants that is installed on systems with wheel variant support and a suitable GPU.

> 2. A CPU-only null variant that is installed on systems with wheel variant support but without suitable GPU.

Author: You can't intersperse features priorities between different priorities (we've removed that since it was confusing). You couldn't declare that `cuda :: CPU` is lower priority than `rocm :: GPU`. And anyway, this really looks like trying to find a more complex solution.

For the record, I'm not a big fan of the null variant. However, it was a compromise I was willing to accept.

> 2. A CPU-only null variant that is installed on systems with wheel variant support but without suitable GPU.

Author: Yes, it does — but it assumes specific plugin design (that is unlikely to emerge, as noted elsewhere), and it's not as generic as the null variant.

values to avoid potential problems if returned namespace mismatched. All methods are only passed properties
in the plugin namespace to reduce the risk of mistakenly processing properties from another namespace.
The `validate_property()` method operates on one property at a time to simplify the return value, since calling it
multiple times is not considered a bottleneck.

The types used in the API are defined using abstract protocols, in order not to force a specific implementation —
especially that such an implementation could end up relying on models deprecated in a future version of Python.
For example, the relevant data types can be implemented using data classes, named tuples, `argparse.Namespace`
or an entirely custom class.

#### Static and dynamic plugins

The split into static and dynamic plugins was introduced to handle diverse use cases for wheel variants. In particular,
it was pointed out that the static design cannot handle use cases where compatible values cannot be predicted up front
and restricted to a fixed list. For these cases, the API permits the plugin to intelligently process the actual property
values specified at build time, for example as version ranges.

> At the same time, the support for the static approach to plugins was preserved in order to facilitate better caching

Author: Good catch. I'll replace them with plain "to" when it makes sense.

and the ability to pin variants easier for the use cases that do not need dynamic processing.

Both versions of the API use the same prototypes to avoid maintaining two divergent API documentations, and to make it
easier to convert plugin from one type to another. The only difference is in the value of `known_properties` argument
to `get_supported_configs()`, that explicitly takes `None` for static plugins to avoid accidentally depending on this
data in static plugins.

### Variant information

#### Format and locations

The variant information format is meant to cover the complete pipeline from building wheels to installing them. It
includes both information needed to build wheel variants and to install them. The information is initially included
in project's `pyproject.toml` file, then copied verbatim into `variant.json` in the built wheel. From there, it is
copied to `*-variants.json` file on the index, where it enables installers to filter and sort supported wheel variants

> without having to fetch all of them.

Author: Well, not really an inspiration per se, because it's the first time I hear of it, but sure, it makes sense to list it as a similar solution.

```
namespace :: feature :: value
```

The `namespace` is defined by the provider plugin, and all properties defined by the provider use the same namespace.
The `feature` specifies the property name, and `value` the corresponding property value. Both `namespace` and `feature`
are ASCII strings of characters in the range `[a-z0-9_]`, while `value` of characters in the range `[a-z0-9_.,!>~<=]`.

A single variant can include multiple features from a namespace, and multiple values for the feature.
For a feature to be considered compatible with the sytem, the provider must indicate that *at least one* of its values
is compatible. For a wheel to be considered compatible, *all* of its features must be compatible.

For example, the following set of features:

```
myprovider :: version :: 1.1
myprovider :: version :: 1.2
myprovider :: accelerated :: yes
```

indicates that `myprovider :: version :: 1.1` *or* `1.2` must be supported, *and* that `myprovider :: accelerated :: yes`
must be supported.

#### Variant hash

Variant hash is computed using the following algorithm, where `properties` are given as a list of property tuples:

```python
import hashlib
import typing

> def variant_hash(properties: typing.Collection[tuple[str, str, str]]) -> str:

Author: Can't use `Iterable` here, since we're checking `len()`. Of course it doesn't limit the actual implementation, but here it's just an example that I'd rather keep simple.

But yeah, `collections.abc.Collection` makes sense.

    def get_supported_configs(
        self, known_properties: frozenset[VariantPropertyType] | None
    ) -> list[VariantFeatureConfigType]:
       ...

    def validate_property(self, variant_property: VariantPropertyType) -> bool:
       ...
```

The plugin must implement the following attributes or properties:

- `namespace` stating the namespace used by the provider

- `dynamic` indicating whether the plugin is dynamic

It must also implement two methods or functions:

- `get_supported_configs()` that returns a list of feature names and values that are compatible with the current
  environment, in their order of preference (i.e. a wheel with such a property can be installed)

- `validate_property()` that checks whether the specified property name and value is valid (i.e. a wheel can be built
  with a such a property)

#### `get_supported_configs()`

The `get_supported_configs()` method is used to obtain the list of configurations that are supported by the current
environment. Its exact semantics depends on whether the provider plugin is declared as dynamic or not.

If the provider is static (`dynamic = False`), the list of supported configurations is expected to be fixed.

> The `known_properties` parameter is always `None`, and the method must return all configurations supported

Reviewer 2: Can we give parameter a default value of `None`?

Author: We could, but to be honest I don't see what that gives us. The frontend will always have to provide the correct value based on `dynamic`, so it will either not achieve anything, or be actively confusing.

The following keys are defined:

- `providers` containing a dictionary of used variant providers, with the names of their namespaces as keys

- `default-priorities` specifying the default priorities used to order wheels by preference

- `variants` containing a dictionary of wheel variants, with their labels as keys and properties as values
  (not present in `pyproject.toml`)

#### Provider information

The provider information dictionary provides information on how to install and use variant providers. It must be
specified in `pyproject.toml` for every variant namespace that is supported. It must be copied to `variant.json` as-is,
including data for providers that are not used in the particular wheel. The dictionary keys are namespaces, while
the values are dictionaries.  They must include the following key:

- `requires: list[str]` specifying a list of one or more package dependency specifiers. When installing the provider,
  all the dependencies are installed (provided their environment markers match).

Additionally, they may include the following keys:

- `enable-if: str` specifying an environment marker defining when the plugin should be used. If the environment marker

>   does not match the running environment, the provider will be disabled and the variants using its properties will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  does not match the running environment, the provider will be disabled and the variants using its properties are
```

  deemed incompatible.

- `optional: bool` specifying whether the provider is optional, as a boolean value. If it is true, the provider
  is considered optional and it should not be used unless the user opts in to it, effectively rendering the variants
  using its properties incompatible. If it is false or missing, the provider is considered required.

- `plugin-api: str` specifying the API endpoint for the plugin. If it is specified, it must be an object reference
  as explained in the "API endpoint" section. If it is missing, the package name from the first dependency specifier

>   in `requires` is used, after replacing all the `-` characters with `_`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  in `requires` is used, after replacing all `-` characters with `_` in the normalized package name.
```

Spec ref: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/binary-distribution-format/#escaping-and-unicode, this doesn't seem to have a name in the spec. The text change normalizes for potential `.` too.

  the wheel variant was built for

- `variant_properties` corresponding to the set of `namespace :: feature :: value` tuples of all the variant properties
  that the wheel variant was built for

The markers are defined as set of strings, and therefore must be matched via the `in` or `not in` operator, e.g.:

```
frobnicate; "foo :: bar :: baz" in variant_properties
```

Implementations should support matching the values while ignoring whitespace.

### Integration with installers

#### Install procedure

When requested to install a package, a package manager supporting wheel variants should:

1. If fetching from a remote index, fetch the corresponding `*-variants.json` file. If the file cannot be downloaded
   or is invalid, wheel variants should be ignored. Any variants not listed in the file should be ignored as well.

2. Determine which provider plugins to use. Plugins that do not match `enable-if` rules, or are optional and were not
   explicitly enabled should be discarded.

3. Create an isolated environment and install the plugin provider packages there. While installing provider plugins,

>    variant support must be disabled.

Author: I'd say a single. In the end, plugins must be able to work within a single environment since that's how PEP 517 build backends are likely going to end up installing them.

4. If dynamic plugins are used, construct a complete set of all properties used in considered variants.

5. Invoke the `get_supported_configs()` plugin API function.

6. Filter out variants that are not compatible according to the returned value. The null variant is always compatible.

7. Install the best variant according to the ordering rules. If no variants are compatible, fall back to the regular
   wheel, if available.

Additionally, package managers should support the following features:

> - disabling variant support entirely

Reviewer 2: Re reproducibility, this would probably also be covered by the static resolved variants file I want to write up, though users will like to have a single switch for that rather than generating and deploying an extra file for that.

> - specifying an explicit variant to install via appending `#{variant label}` to the requirement specifier

Reviewer 2: I would leave this out and rather have it as package manager implementation detail

> - specifying an explicit variant to install via appending `#{variant label}` to the requirement specifier

Author: Removed.

- specifying optional providers to enable

#### Variant ordering

In order to determine the best variant to install, the package manager should order wheel variants using the following
algorithm:

1. All namespaces are ordered according to the priorities specified in `default-priorities.namespace` key.

2. All features within namespaces are initially ordered according to the order in which they are returned
   by `get_supported_configs()`, and afterwards reordered according to the overrides in `default-priorities.feature`

>    key.

Author: Honestly, this is one thing I find horribly hard to describe. I suppose there are two approaches to look at it:

1. You start with initial order given by the plugin, and move these listed in `default-priorities` to front.
2. You start with items from `default-priorities`, and append the rest from plugin.

Here I went for the first approach.

>    key.

Author: Works for me, though I'll remove the duplicate "of features" :-).

3. All property values for features are initially ordered according to the order in which they are returned
   by `get_supported_configs()`, and afterwards reordered according to the overrides in `default-priorities.property`
   key.

4. Properties are sorted top-down according to namespace-feature-value ordering. Properties from a higher priority
   namespace sort above these from a lower priority namespace. Within a single namespace, properties from a higher
   priority feature sort above these from a lower priority feature. Within a single feature, properties from a higher
   priority value sort above these from a lower priority value.

5. Wheel variants are sorted according to their property priorities. A variant with a higher priority property sorts
   above a variant without that property. Therefore, a variant with all possible properties would sort first, a variant
   with all properties but the lowest priority one second, and so on. The null variant always sorts last, but it takes

>    precedence over a non-variant wheel.

Reviewer 2: I see, thanks for the clarification.

and that it permits publishing JSON files. In particular, they do not have to parse variant information in any way.

## Security Implications

The provider plugin mechanism introduces potential security risks. Its flexibility implies that any requested package
may introduce variant wheels, therefore causing the package manager to install arbitrary packages for the provider
plugin, and execute code from them. This effectively goes against [the rationale for the wheel
format](https://peps.python.org/pep-0427/#rationale), that aimed to avoid running arbitrary code at install time.
Furthermore, it has been pointed out that packages that will be used as a regular user are installed with elevated
privileges, effectively making arbitrary code execution even more serious of a threat.

The proposal opens at least two new points in the installation supply chain for malicious actors to inject arbitrary
code payload:

1. A new version of an existing provider plugin is published with malicious code.

2. A new variant is added to an existing package, with a malicious provider.

> Unfortunately, it is impossible to fully address these concerns without sacrificing the flexibility and user

Reviewer 2: Additional item:

- Package managers can vendor or re-implement popular plugins, such as GPU detection or CPU feature detection. This allows installations with variant support without running third-party code. Such functionality is similar to the platform probing installers already have to perform to determine operating system version and libc.

suggested:

- Providing users with more explicit control over variant usage. The package manager should provide options to disable
  variant use entirely, allow users to specify allow-lists and block-lists for variant providers, and pin them.

- Providing the ability to use a static file in place of variant provider calls. Such a file could be generated
  by invoking the plugin in a secured environment or written manually. The installer would consult the file to get
  the list of supported configurations rather than installing and running the plugins. Unfortunately, this will be hard
  to maintain for dynamic plugins, since their output may differ per available variants.

- Maintaining a central registry of vetted variant providers. A central authority would be responsible for scanning
  new plugin releases for malicious code, and maintaining a list of versions and hashes of plugins confirmed
  to be secure.

- Requiring that provider plugins vendor all their dependencies, and disabling dependency installation while installing
  them, therefore reducing the attack surface and making auditing easier.

> ## How to Teach This

Reviewer 2: Important questions are:

* We have to ensure that users are aware that providers means running code, even when installing wheels, and that this has security implications
* How can a user of e.g. `python -m build`can get wheel variants?
* What do I, as a user, get from this extra complexity and the security implications?

to preference in installing.

#### Wheel filename

This specification extends the wheel filename to include an optional variant label. The complete filename follows
the following pattern:

```
{distribution}-{version}(-{build tag})?-{python tag}-{abi tag}-{platform tag}(-{variant label})?.whl
```

Files not featuring the `variant label` part are regular wheels. Variant wheels use it to uniquely identify each
variant. It can either be a 8-character variant hash, or a custom string of 1 to 8 ASCII characters from the range
`[a-z0-9._]`.

For example, the following are valid wheel variant names:

```
mypackage-0.0.1-py3-none-any-fa7c1393.whl
mypackage-0.0.1-cp310-abi3-manylinux_2_28_x86_64-fast.whl
mypackage-0.0.1-3-py3-none-any-fa7c1393.whl
```

#### Variant properties

Each variant is described using zero or more properties. A property is a string of the following form:

```
namespace :: feature :: value
```

The `namespace` is defined by the provider plugin, and all properties defined by the provider use the same namespace.
The `feature` specifies the property name, and `value` the corresponding property value. Both `namespace` and `feature`

> are ASCII strings of characters in the range `[a-z0-9_]`, while `value` of characters in the range `[a-z0-9_.,!>~<=]`.

Author: Adding it to "open questions".

entry points.

#### Plugin API

The plugin API needs to conform to the `PluginType` protocol as exemplified in the following snippet:

```python
class VariantFeatureConfigType:
    name: str
    values: list[str]

cladd VariantPropertyType:
    namespace: str
    feature: str
    value: str

class PluginType:
    namespace: str
    dynamic: bool

    def get_supported_configs(
        self, known_properties: frozenset[VariantPropertyType] | None
    ) -> list[VariantFeatureConfigType]:
       ...

    def validate_property(self, variant_property: VariantPropertyType) -> bool:
       ...
```

The plugin API can be implemented either at class or module level. When implemented as a class, the listen attributes
can also be implemented as properties, and the listed methods can also be class or static methods. When implemented
at module level, the attributes are implemented as global variables, the methods are implemented as global
functions, and the `self` parameter must be omitted.

The plugin must implement the following attributes:

- `namespace` stating the namespace used by the provider

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

- Manylinux standard doesn’t cover all use-cases: [github.com/pypa/manylinux/issues/1725](https://github.com/pypa/manylinux/issues/1725)

### Wheel Variants

### Opt-in vs. opt-out

A critical early design point was whether installing wheel variants when they were published for a package, was supposed
to be opt-in or opt-out. An early proposal
was to make them opt-in, possibly by requiring the user to manually install specific plugins. Then the installer would
use all the plugins found in the environment to determine whether variants are supported. It was pointed out that this
design would hamper the adoption of wheel variants and be a suboptimal solution to the original problem, given that
the users would need to be explicitly aware whether any packages (either installed directly or as a dependency) provide
wheel variants, and then find out which plugin packages they need to install in order to enable them. Furthermore,
the necessity of manually keeping the plugins in acceptable version ranges could cause a significant maintenance burden.

> Instead, an opt-out approach was taken, with plugins being automatically installed into an isolated environment. This

Author: PEP 517 is already mentioned in "plugin API" part.

approach ensures that variants work out of the box, and users can benefit from them with minimal maintenance burden.
To satisfy the localized need for an opt-in solutions, providers can be marked optional — in which case they must be
enabled explicitly but still benefit from automatic provider installation.

#### Wheel filename

In order to distinguish different variants, a variant label was added to the filename. The label is added as the very
last component to make it easy to distinguish different variants.

The model defaults to using a hash to provide unique and reproducible filenames out of the box. However, it

> permits explicitly choosing a different label to make variants easy to recognize by humans. The label length

Author: Label format is for specification, not rationale part.

the same name. The character sets for all components are restricted to make it easier to preserve consistency
between different providers, in particular uppercase characters are rejected to avoid different spellings of the same
name. The character set for values is more relaxed, to permit values resembling versions and version
specifications.

Multiple values are permitted as a logical disjunction, while different features are treated conjunctively. This is
meant to provide some flexibility in designating variant compatibility while avoiding having to implement a complete
boolean logic. This flexibility is further extended via the concept of dynamic plugins, permitting the values to
be dynamically interpreted, e.g. as version ranges.

#### Variant hash

Variant hash is used as a stable and unique identifier for every set of variant properties. It is truncated to
8 characters to ensure that filenames remain short. SHA256 algorithm was chosen, because it is already widely
used in wheels, in the `RECORD` file and therefore the package managers do not have to implement an additional
algorithm.

> To ensure reproducible hash values, properties are sorted before hashing. They are then serialized into a canonical

Author: Again, the algorithm is in "specification" section, and it includes sorting as well.

Remember how I told you that I find it out of order that "rationale" comes before "specification" in PEPs? These comments precisely prove my point.

3. A GPU+CPU regular wheel that is installed on systems without wheel variant support.

In particular, this makes it possible to publish a smaller null variant for systems that do not feature suitable GPUs,
with a fallback regular wheel with support for CPU and all GPUs for systems where variants are not supported
and therefore GPU support cannot be determined.

Publishing a null variant is entirely optional. If one is missing, then the non-variant wheel is used instead.
The non-variant wheel is also used if variant support is explicitly disabled.

### Plugin API

#### General design

The plugin API was largely inspired by [PEP 517](https://peps.python.org/pep-0517/). However, it was extended to support
classes that are instantiated, to facilitate single initialization and clean caching of plugin state between
multiple method calls. For the convenience of plugin authors, both class-level and module-level (with global variables
and functions) API implementations are supported.

For the primary use in building packages and installing wheel variants, the plugin API endpoint is either specified

> explicitly or inferred from requirements. Support for the latter was added as the need to explicitly guess the correct

Author: It's explained in specification section.

`build-backend` value was noted as a significant shortcoming of PEP 517. However, for the convenience of package
developers, plugins are recommended to install entry points as well. Thanks to that, the developer can install
the relevant provider plugins to their system, and variant-related tooling will be able to automatically discover it
and obtain the correct API backend values.

> The API means to be absolutely minimal and is specified using abstract protocols. Its centerpiece is a function that

Author: `typing.Protocol` is an implementation detail, and the plugin API does not adhere to it strictly.

relevant to building, to keep all the configuration in a single location. The complete information is copied verbatim
into the wheel, to facilitate the ability of constructing `*-variants.json` for index using prebuilt wheels alone.

The `*-variants.json` files are generated separately for every package version. This makes it possible to upload them
along with every new version without having to update the previous file. It also makes it possible for the index
to generate the file after all files for a version have been uploaded, similarly to the `.metadata` files.

#### Provider information

All providers are keyed on their namespaces, to permit matching them easily to variant properties. The two
most important data are the `requires` key that is necessary to automatically install the provider plugin and therefore
enable automatic selection of variants, and the `plugin-api` key that provides flexibility in layouting the plugin
to the author's wishes.

The `requires` key permits uses standard Python dependency specifier syntax, and permits multiple values similarly
to the dependency specifiers used elsewhere in package management context. For user convenience, `plugin-api` is

> optional and defaults to the value inferred from the first package in `requires` — this aims to reduce the need

Author: Sure but I think repeating it here makes sense — the first time we're telling how plugins are loaded, and the second time we're talking about specific config bits. Without repeating it, the readers would have to connect the dots themselves.

  is similar to the platform probing installers already have to perform to determine operating system version and libc.

## How to Teach This

### Installer documentation

The documentation intended for installer users will need to cover:

- The concept of wheel variants and their effect on wheel selection
- The security implications of variant provider use and ways to mitigate them
- Options and configuration specific to variant selection
- Instructions for debugging unexpected behavior, notably incorrect variant selection

### Build backend documentation

The documentation intended for package builders will need to cover:

- Instructions on finding variant providers and inspecting their properties
- Options related to specifying variant properties and label
- Tutorials on building variant wheels

### Provider-related documentation

The documentation related to variant providers will need to cover:

- Technical details and good practices for developing and maintaining provider plugins
- Tutorials on creating new provider plugins
- Governance practices for provider plugins

### Technical documentation

After the PEP is accepted, the [Binary distribution format](

> https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/binary-distribution-format/) specification will need to be updated

Reviewer 4: I think it would be good to go over what changes you'd want to see in the wheel format/filename.

> https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/binary-distribution-format/) specification will need to be updated

Reviewer 4: If the change is completely backwards compatible, then I would say it should be a minor wheel version bump, but it is hard to say.

## Rejected Ideas

> ### Alternative approaches

Reviewer 2: The most important alternative is to make platform tags GPU aware. This was rejected due to the combinatorial explosion, the platform tags already being complex and the GPUs changing relative quickly (unlike OS, CPU architecture and libc kinds, which barely changed in the last decade)

![pytorch selector](../assets/images/pytorch_variant_selector.webp)

### Wheel Variants

#### Wheel filename

- Adding the variant label as a third component (before the build tag) with additional `~` characters. This approach
  was ultimately rejected, as adding it as a last component made it easier to distinguish different variants,
  and achieved the same goals.

> - Using labels in addition to the variant hash. This approach was rejected because it caused unnecessary increase

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Using both hash an label in the filename. This approach was rejected because it caused an unnecessary increase
```

  of filename length. As the specification evolved and made it unnecessary to include the hash in the filename,
  it was suggested to replace it with a human-readable label instead.

> - Automatically generating human-readable labels by providers. This idea did not fit well with very limited variant

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't reject this outright, for the cases where you have e.g. only a cpu provider or only a GPU provider that's totally feasible.

Author: Perhaps, but I don't think this would be trivial to design. For example, looking at the previous example of four possible variants: the `cu122` and `x8664v4` variants are both single-property, so would fall into using the custom label. However, `cu122 + x8664v4` would no longer get a custom label, which would be quite inconsistent.

  label length.

- Using a distinct character (such as `+`) as a variant label separator. This would make wheel variants even more
  distinct from regular wheels, and make it easier to adjust the current filename processing algorithms, by avoiding
  the ambiguity of a 6-component filename (that could either mean build tag or variant label being present).
  The proposal relies on the variant label being interpreted as part of the platform tag by pre-variant implementations,
  and therefore rejected based on unsupported platform. However, this approach does not work correctly if the wheel
  uses multiple platform tags, e.g. `platform1.platform2+label` could be selected if `platform1` matched.

#### Variant properties

- Originally, only a single value was permitted for a property. This assumed that variants designate a specific
  property of the wheel (e.g. a CPU version it was built for), while the provider plugins indicate which of these
  properties are supported by the system. However, during discussion the need for an opposite approach was indicated,

>   where the wheel designates its compatibility (e.g. as a multiple compatible runtime versions), and the plugin verifies

Reviewer 2: Can you add the specific example here?

Author: I think @DEKHTIARJonathan would know better here. It was his idea, after all.
